Paper: Unlocking the Missing 78%: Inclusive Communities for the Future of Scientific Python (#1108)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/unlocking_78/unlocking_78.md

## Abstract
Women account for **15–22 %** of the global data science workforce and less than **3 %** of commits to core Python repositories {cite:p}`bcg2020women,rossi2022gender,isu2023onein20`. This “missing 78 %” drains talent, innovation, and economic value scientific Python. We first quantify the gap, then unpack its root causes, and finally propose the Visibility–Invitation–Mechanism (VIM) framework, as a practical remedy. A mixed methods case study—IBM Women in AI (WAI) User Group shows VIM in action: membership jumped from 17 to 38 within a week of its March 2025 launch (↑124 %).

## Introduction  
Python dominates contemporary data science and scientific computing, yet women are conspicuously scarce across its contributor base and professional user community. Longitudinal GitHub analyses show women’s share of commits to high-impact Python projects rising from ≈ 2 % in 2008 to 4.9 % in 2021{cite:p}`rossi2022gender`. Labour-market surveys place women at ≈ 20 % of data-science roles globally, lower than many adjacent STEM domains {cite:p}`bcg2020women,turing_women_ai`.

> ### 1.1 Problem Statement — Why the VIM lens?  

Reviewer: Section numbering will be added implicitly; it should not be included in the headers. For example:

```suggestion
###  Problem Statement — Why the VIM lens?  
```

Then, when you are referencing sections, rather than hard-coding the number in the section (e.g. `Section 3`), use a cross-reference (e.g. `@systemic-barriers`). Documentation and examples for this can be found in the MyST docs: https://mystmd.org/guide/cross-references#targeting-headers

Reviewer 2: Please remove the hard-coded section numbers from your headers! In addition, there are a few headings with stray ## at the end of the line that should be also cleaned up

Author: Removed all hard-coded section numbers from headers

### 1.2 Research Objectives and Questions  
:::{table} Research questions
:label: tbl:rq
<table>
  <thead>
    <tr><th style="width:25%">ID</th><th style="width:75%">Research question</th></tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><td><strong>RQ1 (Scale)</strong></td>
        <td>How large is the gender gap in scientific-Python&nbsp;/ data-science?</td></tr>
    <tr><td><strong>RQ2 (Barriers)</strong></td>
        <td>What systemic factors keep women out?</td></tr>
    <tr><td><strong>RQ3 (Interventions)</strong></td>
        <td>Which actions measurably close the gap?</td></tr>
    <tr><td><strong>RQ4 (Translation)</strong></td>
        <td>How can communities roll those actions out in practice?</td></tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:::

### 1.3 Methodological Overview

> Our embedded case-study design enables triangulation of large-scale secondary data with fine-grained community observations. Quantitatively, we analyze membership counts, demographic self-report, and structured survey items to detect early engagement signals. Qualitatively, we code open-ended survey comments and the PyData talk transcript to surface emergent themes. This mixed-methods approach improves complementarity—numerical trends provide breadth, while narrative data add explanatory depth.

Reviewer 2: To improve transparency, it would be helpful to specify sample sizes and timeframes for each dataset

Author: Added sample sizes and timeframes: survey responses from all post-launch participants (n=26), covering December 2024–March 2025; membership counts tracked continuously from initial launch.

*Ethical considerations.* All WAI membership data are voluntary and stored under GDPR-compliant protocols. Identifiable information is aggregated or anonymized before analysis; gender and role fields are self-declared. The study received a low-risk determination from the IBM Research Ethics Committee (ID WAI 2025 04).

> Secondary statistics are drawn from peer-reviewed literature and public dashboards (Table 1) to locate the case in a broader empirical context.

Reviewer: Figure and table references should also be cross-references, not hard-coded numbers. For example:

```suggestion
Secondary statistics are drawn from peer-reviewed literature and public dashboards (@tbl:gap) to locate the case in a broader empirical context.
```

Author: @fwkoch - thank you for the detailed guidelines. I will start working on these.

      <figure>
        <img src="Venn_Diagram.png"
             alt="Venn diagram illustrating the conceptual overlap of CoP, CHAOSS DEI, and VIM frameworks"
             style="width:90%;" />
        <figcaption>
          <strong>Figure 1.</strong> Venn diagram illustrating the conceptual overlap and synthesis of CoP,
          CHAOSS DEI, and VIM frameworks, with VIM positioned at the intersection and extending beyond.
        </figcaption>
      </figure>
    </td>
  <tr>
    <!-- ---------- Column 2 ---------- -->
    <td style="width:50%; vertical-align:top; text-align:center; padding:0 1rem;">
      <figure>
        <img src="Spider.png"
             alt="Radar chart comparing CoP, CHAOSS DEI, and VIM across five inclusion dimensions"
             style="width:30%; height:auto;" />
        <figcaption>
          <strong>Figure&nbsp;2.</strong> Radar chart comparing CoP, CHAOSS DEI, and VIM across five inclusion
          dimensions: Social, Structural, Actionability, Metrics, and Subjective Experience.
        </figcaption>
      </figure>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>
:::

## Systemic Barriers  

> Five mutually reinforcing hurdles keep women from fully participating in scientific Python. Each erodes one or more pillars of the Visibility–Invitation–Mechanism (VIM) framework.

Reviewer 2: Strong point. Clarifying whether any of these barriers are specific to scientific python communities, or if they mirror broader patterns in open-source participation, would strengthen the specificity.

Reviewer 3: @aftabn81 - please follow up on these requested edits.

Author: @ameyxd - Thanks for the reminder! I’ve addressed all requested edits:
• Added retention and monthly active user data (Section 4.2).
• Clarified feasibility of actions (short-term toolkit/sprints vs. longer-term institutional support).
• Specified sample sizes and timeframes (Section 1.3).
• Clarified systemic barriers as broad open-source patterns.

On 5 December 2024 at PyData Global, we presented “The Missing 78 %,” revealing that women represent only 22 % of AI professionals and < 3 % of core Python contributors. Audience demand for actionable next steps led to the rapid formation of the IBM Women in AI (WAI) User Group, founded two weeks later to put our Visibility–Invitation–Mechanism (VIM) framework into practice.

::: {table} Phased Launch Timeline (Dec ’24–Mar ’25 → Mar ’25)
:label: tbl:launch-timeline

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th style="width:20%">Phase</th>
      <th style="width:25%">Key Dates</th>
      <th style="width:55%">Activities &amp; Metrics</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Soft Launch</td>
      <td>16 Dec 2024 – 1 Mar 2025</td>
      <td>Invite-only Slack/GitHub rehearsal; baseline survey (14/14 responses)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Public Launch</td>
      <td>8 Mar 2025</td>
      <td>LinkedIn + email: +21 sign ups (10% via LinkedIn)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Today</td>
      <td></td>
      <td>39 Active Members; live lab for VIM</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:::

### 4.2 Phased Rollout & Membership Growth

> Membership grew from **14** (Soft Launch) to **39** (Public Launch) in one week—a **124 % jump**—demonstrating immediate interest.

Reviewer 2: It would help to include one or two sentences on retention.

Author: Added retention data: ~100% retention across the first cohort (n=25) and ~85% monthly active users. Noted that high retention may be influenced by the small initial sample size.

WAI’s phased, member-driven rollout grew the group from 14 → 39 in six months, showing how VIM’s action-insight-adapt loop converts research into real impact.

## A Roadmap for Fostering Inclusion in Data, AI, and Open-Source Communities
(June 2025 – onward; builds directly on Section 4’s Phase I pilots.)

The Visibility–Invitation–Mechanism framework—and its concrete realization via WAI’s four Phase I initiatives (Section 4)—provides a scalable blueprint for closing the “Missing 78 %” gap (Section 2.1). To expand beyond WAI’s single-community proof of concept, we outline ten practical Actions. The first four mirror WAI’s Phase I pilots; the remaining six build on those foundations and stretch into broader partnerships, metrics, and shared learning.

### 5.1 The Imperative for Systemic Change

Open-source AI and data projects power global innovation, yet women frequently represent fewer than 10 – 15 % of contributors—and far less among maintainers (Section 2.1). This imbalance risks embedding bias in critical technologies. Systemic, data-driven inclusion is a necessity, not a luxury.

> 

Reviewer 2: These actions are well laid out. Consider adding a note on feasibility: which actions are short-term achievable (toolkit, sprints) vs. which ones require sustained institutional support (partnerships, inclusion community events)

Author: Thank you for the suggestion! I’ve added a feasibility note clarifying which actions are short-term vs. which require longer-term institutional support.
